On that first semester, did you have some teachers
that you realize now were important?
Yeah, I mean, I had an odd collection.
My English teacher was quite good, and I don't
remember his name. My second semester, I had C.K.
Weston, and that was an experience. Describe the
Well, he was crazy. I mean, he told all these
stories about growing up in a house of ill repute,
being raised by prostitutes. And all of his
examples and things were sort of built around
this. And he would get a little loud. Of course, he
was an actor by his own, I guess, ambition. And so he
acted out in the classroom a lot. Would tell dirty
stories that would curl your hair today.
Fortunately, there were no women at the time. It
didn't make any difference. And then we, along the
way, figured out, of course, that he was the voice
of Kyle Field, which helped explain it a bit. But
Esten was a real character. freshman math
teacher, algebra teacher, who was a fifth year
senior. He was a brilliant guy, but very confused.
He would wear his corps uniform with a cowboy belt
and buckle. Or he would wear civilian clothes with
his corps belt and shoes. And he was still going
through the ROTC program because he had to finish,
I guess he probably started there. But he was an odd
duck. A fellow named Doug With was a teacher that
took Animal Science 107 that freshman year, who's
now dead, was a very high quality teacher.
Probably had been an ag teacher or a 4-H leader or
something, and has been very involved in
livestock youth programs. And he was a good
teacher. Chemistry was a guy named,
gee, I can't remember his name. What I remember
about him was we had Chemistry 101 at old chemistry
lecture hall, probably seat 300 kids. And if you
happen to doze off, he would throw a piece of chalk
at you. And a friend of mine named Andy Combs could
never stay awake, and he sat in the next. And you
drew chairs. They assigned you by numbers to the
chairs. So I had to stay alert, because I knew there
was going to be a piece of chalk coming at me.
Targeted for Andy, but he wasn't that accurate.
But I mean, I can't imagine today either, a
professor standing at the front of the room. Of
course, they probably don't have chalk anymore.
They're teaching with PowerPoint. As you got into
the academic program, what did you realize were
the unwritten rules about going to class and so
forth? Well, in those days, if you were a
distinguished student, you were exempt from
class. Now, that sounds like a strange concept.
But it was very coveted because you did have other
things that frequently got in the way. So back to my
earlier point, one of the good things about being a
distinguished student the first semester is that
I had some choices the second semester. What you
figured out, though, is even if you were comatose,
you better be in that class. They were keeping
score. Oh, I remember the fellow's name in
chemistry. I think his name was Doc Little.
We had chemistry lab at 1 o'clock on Friday
afternoon. That was one of the bad parts about
someone else doing my schedule. But when we had a
pop quiz, he would come in the window. He would be on
the ledge. of the chemistry building, come in the
window and throw chicken feathers in the room. And
Love just had a great time with this. And by the way,
that was canceled in November because as I walked
from Duncan Dining Hall back to my dorm room to get
my chemistry lab stuff, a fellow came to the end of
dorm seven yelling, the president has been shot.
And I looked back, and I was a freshman, and I looked
at the guy, and I said, don't joke about something
like that. And he said, no joke. Went back, turned
that little phonograph Victrola thing on, had a
radio in it, sure enough, and learned that he had
been shot. What other, let's center on that. What
did you and your buddies think about that event,
and what did you all do that night, and so forth? You
know, it's interesting.
Thinking back on it, I had very much the same
sensation that I had with the bonfire event this
year, in that there was this huge tragedy. You were
helpless and uncertain about what was going on.
And frankly, in those days, it was worse than that,
because you didn't know if it might be some kind of
conspiracy or attack against the country. It was
really very much unknown. So we sat around in our
rooms with each other in sort of groups and talked
about what was going on. And then it happened, I
guess, on must have been Monday or Tuesday, I don't
remember, bonfire was canceled. It was partially
built, but not completely. And I remember going to
meeting a high school friend of mine who was going
to UT and went to Austin and spent the night with him
and his, I think, sister just to get away and sort of
regroup and try to figure out what was going on. And
then the game was played. It was a great ball game.
In fact, Texas was the national champion that
year. We beat them in Kyle Field, but the refs gave
them seven points. And we failed to pull it off. But
why I know we beat them was I was sitting where the,
if you remember where the old horseshoe in Kyle
Field was, there was a entrance for the band to
march through. I was the first guy on the first row
next to that with a date,
Fish Harned's sister from Fort Worth, when I saw
Jim Willenborg catch the intercept pass in the end
zone and slide out of the end zone on his knees, and
they called him out of bounds. So I had a front row
seat to record this. Back to getting broken into
the core, describe the routine for a fish in the
dining hall. This is in Duncan. You're in the new
area. Well, you know, interestingly, the dorms
were Compared to where I was living at home, they
were quite nice. I mean, they were brick. They had
concrete floors, which were waxed. We had
concrete floors. Still steam heated with no air
conditioning. But they were Spartan, but they
were OK. The dining hall was a horrible disaster.
One of the problems in those days was you could
never get enough to eat. I mean, this was a... This
was a period when we went through with what I
consider probably A&M was having trouble getting
anyone to come here. So among the group, you got a
lot of sadists signed up. And for whatever reason,
the dining hall became a place where the
harassment level was high, and intimidation was
high, and it wasn't a lot of fun. Now, the other
thing is we had yell practice two nights a week. uh
it was tradition quote that c1 and d1 be on the front
row of kyle field on the 50-yard line with their
guidons next to each other which meant you marched
in you stood at attention you had the prayer you sat
down you drank one glass of milk You had the
announcements and you left. So two nights a week,
you got nothing to eat other than you might be able
to slosh down a little milk. By the way, another
part of the yell practice routine was that They
moved the yell practice from the Grove to Kyle
Field, maybe the previous fall or maybe that fall.
And we're standing on the front row, me and my fish
buddy have the guide on. And this guy comes walking
down the track, waving and shouting and saying
hello to everybody, throwing bags of popcorn up
into the, and you know, you're supposed to be
standing at attention. And the fellow was sort of
chubby, balding, round-faced. And my official
lady leans over to me and says, who is that? And I
said, I think it's President Rutter. Well, it was
Lupo. And Lupo was out, of course, drumming up
business among the good ol' eggs. And I'll never
forget that mistake that I made. President
Rutter, fortunately, never knew it. But back to
the dining hall, if you weren't doing Hot Corner,
which was through the family-style system where
the meals came to, Or you were a, this is a word that
can't be used in contemporary terms, but it
started with an N, and it was the person that served
the junior or senior at that table, that you were
his N.
And those two were sort of specific assignments.
And then the rest of the time you were just getting
harassed. Now the good advantage was if you could
find a time when you didn't have a class after chow,
you could hang around until everybody else
departed in a meal hound. You had to endure a lot to
get there, but you did. It was one of the ways you got
food. There were a lot of little playful things
that went on. You often got an assignment to crawl
through a few tables and light someone's bib.
You've probably heard of this little deal. Or we
had a few other games, like we played a game called
Cal. And you'd have two freshmen across from each
other, each who would try to take an entire bottle
of, at that time, cream-reproduced milk, put it in
their mouths, and then stare at each other while
the upperclassmen told them jokes. And then
whoever, of course, broke first, spit the milk on
the other guy. And it was really not, it was great
fun, if you think about it. And then there were
routines about you had to know all this
campusology so people would ask you questions.
And you got to eat if you answered them and you
didn't if you didn't. Were those called Cush
questions? Well, Cush questions were for
dessert. Oh, but there were just of these? There
was campusology questions throughout. And of
course you had to call all the food by its proper
name, which I had trouble remembering. I wasn't a
very good freshman. What I figured out early on,
which I think was sort of the standard way of
surviving, was two things. One is it was a game, and
you had to understand it was a game if you got real
serious about it. you were in trouble. And the
second was you had the only friends you had were
your fish buddies. You'd occasionally find an
upperclassman who would befriend you, drop
handles and was sort of a place to escape to. But it
was rare. The fish buddies, it was a Darwinian
existence that you survived through your
freshman friends. And you found ways to answer
back through those freshman friends. So
everybody knew that the game was being played that
way. Do you remember any retaliation that you and
your fish buddies wreaked on some people? Yeah,
there were a few popular methods, all handed down
in terms of the methodology. The favorite thing
was drowning out.
I never did understand why the rule was such, but
you couldn't lock your doors at night, even if you
were an upperclassman. And so, but the old doors in
the, in those dorms, if you, what you would do is you
would vee the, you would open the main door and the
other closet door and they veed together the
doorknobs hooked and it provided a airway path
through the room. And I guess the reason they
didn't lock them was because they couldn't stand
the heat. But what you do is you'd fill a, they had
old plastic trash cans, probably 50-gallon trash
cans. And you would fill that pretty much with
water. And then you would go into an
upperclassman's room and two guys or three guys,
and you would wash them right out of the bed with
that 50-gallon can of water. We had one, we had a
sophomore frog came in at mid-semester his
sophomore year, and our assignment given to us by
the sophomore class was to drown him out every
night his spring semester. So we dutifully had to
get somebody assigned to, and it was sort of like
after a while it got to be a joke because he knew it
was coming. literally every night. Now, they
finally called it off after a while, but this got to
be pretty tortuous for everybody. In hindsight,
was he a bad egg? Did he deserve this kind? Well, he
was a frog sophomore, so he hadn't gone through the
same experience they'd gone through, and so they
considered this sort of a duty. As it turned out, he
was sort of a different kind of fellow, but not that
different. And the assignment came from his
classmates? His classmates. The sophomores?
Right. We got another assignment which in a way was
sort of tragic. We had two juniors who were in a bit
of a pitched battle. And one of them was the first
sergeant. And we got the assignment of taking the
first sergeant, putting him in a mattress cover.
Our mattresses had cotton covers that tied back in
those days for sanitation purposes, I assume.
Took him out of his bed, put him in the mattress
cover, took him out to the site now where Kruger
Dunn Aston Mosier is, was then a drill area. Took a
logging chain, attached it to the sack, and tied
him up into an oak tree. And then we all go back to our
dorm and try to go back to sleep, of course, with
your heart going 90 miles an hour. What I remember
is the sound of the chain clanking as it came up the
stairs. And then the next thing I knew, you had all
the freshmen up in the hallway. And we were doing
something called manual of arms with our foot
lockers. Now, you know what manual of arms is. Boy,
when you're doing right shoulder, left shoulder,
present arms, try imagining doing that with a full
foot lock. And this is probably, by this time, it's
1 or 2 in the morning, and our CO, Charlie Fisher,
comes out and finds all this going on and shuts it
down. And as a result, both Parker, the first
sergeant, and this other junior were kicked out of
the Corps. And one of them might have even been
kicked out of school. I can't remember. This was
not an unusual event. I mean, this is a pretty
standard event. It's just that it got elevated to
the point where there was a feud, and we were in the
middle of it. So that the footlocker was... A
little like a rifle. That was too severe, the
footlocker routine. Oh, yeah. But the drowning
out... No, no, that's okay. That was okay. Yeah.
And there were Babbo bombs, which I'm sure you've
heard of, which... Bevel bombs were fine as long as
you took the metal ends out. See, bevel cans had
aluminum or metal. And what you learned was you
take that out and you put ankle tape, basically, on
the ends of the can. The best ones were the ones that
were hooked up to a cherry bomb, hooked up to the
light switch so that you had it hooked to the room.
And then when they flipped the switch, it blew up
and went all over the room. but one of the best
things that we did though in retaliation paid
dearly for it but uh our our co as i said was sort of a
gentle fellow and he decided that he didn't really
want to work on the bonfire and this was in those
days you built a bonfire in roughly 10 days as soon
as the rice game ended which was always the week
before UT.
If it was here, after the game, you immediately
went to the cut site. If it was in Houston, you drove
back and went to work at the cut site the next day.
Well, anyway, Fisher decided that he was a senior
and he was tired of bonfire and he was going to go
home to Cuero for the weekend. At the time, they
were building what's now the president's home.
And there was plenty of brick and sand and mortar
available. And we had some rather ingenious
freshmen in the outfit. And we managed to lug over
there enough brick, sand, and mortar to mortar up
Charlie Fisher's door from the inside. And it was
on the fourth floor. Byron Watts who was the
ringleader of this had a grappling hook and a rope
so that he could get down to the co-conspirators
upperclassmen on the third floor corner room and
get out after he had finished the brick job so when
Charlie comes back on Sunday evening from Cuero to
get in his room he puts his key in the old metal door
and lock and pushes and nothing happens And no
matter what he does, and of course the hinges are on
the inside, this thing is, it's literally like a
castle moat. There's no way to get in it. The
physical plant people had to finally come over,
and I think they just had to break the door down. I
don't even remember how they got in. I just know
that we had a great time with that little event. And
no one got kicked out for that? Oh, no. No, that was
just good bull. And did anyone admit... to any
authority as to who? Only years later.
Let's see.
Describe the bonfire routine. You said you all
came back from the rice game and started. How far
away was the cut area? Do you remember? Don't
really remember. I would say probably It was
probably five, 10 miles, something like that. We
would leave the dorm, go to Duncan Field, get on
flatbed trucks in the middle of what seemed like
the middle of the night. And those trucks would
haul us out to the cut site. And then we, our outfit
responsibility was at the cut site, and then we
were the final guards of the bonfire, right before
it was lighted. That's all changed through time.
Did you and your buddies, did you all cut logs? No,
only upperclassmen could either use a chainsaw or
an ax. Freshmen were just grunts. We cut logs. what
were known as F-sticks. And these were oak
saplings, probably three or four inches in
diameter, and then long enough to get a log in the
middle and three freshman on each side. And you
lined the sticks up, rolled the log on it, and then
through just sheer, I mean, I can imagine how the
pyramids were built. That's how you built. the
bonfire. And then you would haul it to the truck,
the three kids on the truck side would stick the
sticks on the bed, duck under, come out, and then
the three on the other side would roll it on and
there you went until you got the trucks loaded. And
as far as you were aware, this routine was copied
from the previous years. And as far as you know,
what injuries were there, if any, that year? Nicks
and cuts and exhaustion and classes missed and
that's it. i you know i think i've reflected on this
a lot and it's not the purpose of the uh of the
discussion but there were a couple of things one
was it was the the core chain of command uh was
although there was a lot of horseplay and
craziness at the end of the day the one thing that
was emphasized was safety and procedure and you
know you you did you did things and if you screwed up
you were still in that chain of command. I mean, it
could be dealt with. It was not a sort of a separate
student organization without that kind of core
discipline and attention. The other thing was
that we tended to specialize. Certain corps
outfits were responsible for certain things.
What I remember is the band was at the site
offloading. And then there were engineering
outfits responsible for actually doing the
stack. There was very little, almost nobody on the
stack. I mean, it was rare for anybody to be up top.
What they typically did was go up there do some
topping out and cleaning up but but most of the
stack work was done by tilting the logs up from the
bottom and building out in a teepee form so you
didn't have the kids exposed like they were and
this was on the drill field or Duncan field Duncan
field and it already moved over there right and as
far as you recall about how many stacks high
there's only one stack I mean, how many stacks? I
don't know. It all looked like a big Indian teepee.
And the tops of each log were not cut off exactly
like a... No. It was very roughly formed, which
probably, you know, helped its stability because
everything tended to be intertwined and
interlocking. And it was, you know, a lot has been
made about the 1969 bonfire being the tallest
ever. If you look at it, it's tall only because
there's a long center pole and a few sticks at the
top, but it was really pretty symptomatic of the
bonfires of the time. It was mostly a lean-to kind
of teepee formation. so y'all worked about uh
let's see you worked on it but that bonfire was not
burned was not burned we worked on it for i guess a
week through the weekend prior to well that's not
right kennedy was killed on friday so it was it was
friday that we stopped work and it was that
saturday and sunday that i went to austin and then
of course they announced that the and do you
remember i don't what happened to those logs the
public was invited to come and take whatever they
wanted that's right there was no and then i guess
somebody physical plant probably cleaned it up
when it was all over but Another interesting
thing, I went back to the game. You remember the old
tradition that if we beat University of Texas on
Thanksgiving, we got Monday off. Well, we didn't
beat them, but Rudder gave us Monday off and we all
thought he was a hero. because of the way that we
were treated by the referees. Your mention of
President Rutter, when do you first recall seeing
him or having any interaction with him as a
student? You know, I mean, I knew he was the
president as a freshman, and I probably, you know,
there were some, I remember a Guyon Hall event
early in our time. It was the old Guyon Hall, when
you look left and look right, you know, and half of
you are going to be gone speech. And I think Rudder
was probably at that speech, but he was sort of a
distant icon, and I didn't really know anything
about him. He was, Rutter was a guy that frankly
didn't have a lot of personality. I mean he was a
strong-willed, firm, resolute sort of fellow
who, I mean he had some good humor about him, don't
misunderstand me, but I couldn't see it as a young
student. Probably my first real exposure came to
him through the student senate. We had a student
senate, I was on the student senate, and he would
meet with us occasionally, especially on
controversial issues, and we had a few in our day.
We had a faculty member in veterinary medicine
that was
fired, I guess, would be the proper way. A tenured
faculty member, in fact. And Rutter was the guy who
made the decision. And of course, the faculty were
all over him to the degree that they could in those
days. And the student newspaper was all over him.
And a friend of mine, this was actually, I guess,
our senior, fall of our senior year. A friend of
mine named Tommy DeFrank was the editor of the
battalion and Tommy took Rutter on and Rutter told
him, you know, one more article, Tommy, and you're
gone. Tommy, citing First Amendment rights, took
one more shot at it and sure enough he was gone. And
so we had a little controversy surrounding all
that, but probably my sophomore or junior year
through the Student Senate would have been the
first real. Now in those days the Student Senate
met in a small second floor room in the MSC. There
were probably I don't know, 20, 25 people, whereas
today it's hundreds, you know, and that's sort of
become the English Parliament. But in those days
it was small because the place was small. That
freshman year, did you go on court trips? Yes.
Describe that. I probably shouldn't.
The first one I remember going to was to the Rice
Corps trip in Houston. And a couple of buddies of
mine, one in my outfit and one that was a high school
friend from Trent, Texas, the Trent Gorillas, was
the other person. And I guess there were four of us,
because we couldn't afford to get one. And we got a
room in the old Rice Hotel downtown. And we got
someone to buy some booze for us. And after the
game, which I'm sure we lost, I can't remember, but
pretty sure we did, we went back to the room and
boozed it up and had a good time and made the
downtown streets of Houston along with a lot of
other ne'er-do-wells. The thing I remember most
was there were tiebacks on the curtains in the old
rooms. that were made much resembling a crapper
cord, you know, that you wore in the corps. So we
absconded with those curtain pullbacks and
decided they would be our crapper cords as
freshmen in the corps. And years later, I came
across that thing in some stuff my mother had kept.
She probably thought it was for real. You didn't
have a date on that? Did not have a date. What about
the Dallas or Fort Worth? We had a great time in
Dallas because I had a friend named Sarah Lee Moyer
who I went to high school with who had gone to North
Texas. And our court trip that year was to Fort
Worth. And I had called Sara Lee to see if she might
know of some girls at North Texas that would be
interested in a date. Well, she said, I think so.
And so we all head up there. And she's arranged, I
don't know, probably eight or 10 kids to have
dates. They were gorgeous little girls.
Everybody had a great time. We just had a ball. And
everything was fine. until our sophomore year
when we went to the Corps trip in Dallas, at which
time I had people lining up at my door saying, hey,
you think we could do this again? Well, I did. And
Sarah Lee complied. But what she failed to tell me
was this was the same weekend as North Texas
homecoming. So the quality of the dates went
downhill just a little from the first year to the
next. So I wasn't nearly as popular the second time
around as I was the first.